'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon version" 1 "15 September 2016" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon version \- Shows and updates version numbers in module descriptors
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon version\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--confirm=\fIoption\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--dependencies] [--encoding=\fIcharset\fR] [--no-update-dependencies] [--set=\fIvalue\fR] [--source=\fIdirs\fR...] [--src=\fIdir\fR...] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] [modules]\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
If \*(T<\-\-set\*(T> is present then update the module versions, otherwise show the module versions.
.PP
If \*(T<\-\-dependencies\*(T> is present then show the versions of module imports of the given module(s).
.PP
\*(T<<modules>\*(T> specifies the module names (excluding versions) of the modules to show or whose versions should be updated. If unspecified then all modules are shown/updated.
.PP
\fBNote:\fR Other modules may also be updated unless the \*(T<\-\-no\-update\-dependencies\*(T> option is used, even if they're not listed in \*(T<<modules>\*(T>
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--confirm=\fIoption\fR
Used with \*(T<\-\-set\*(T>, determines which updates require confirmation.
.RS 
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\*(T<\-\-confirm=all\*(T> requires confirmation on the console for each update performed.
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\*(T<\-\-confirm=dependencies\*(T> means that confirmation is only required when updating versions appearing in module imports; module versions are updated without confirmation.
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\*(T<\-\-confirm=none\*(T> prevents any confirmation.
.RE

(default: \*(T<all\*(T>).
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--dependencies
Display modules who depend on the given module. Only used when displaying modules, not when setting a new version.
.TP 
--encoding=\fIcharset\fR
Used with \*(T<\-\-set\*(T>, sets the encoding used for reading and writing the \*(T<module.ceylon\*(T> files (default: platform-specific).
.TP 
--no-update-dependencies
Do not update of the version in module imports of the target module(s) in other modules in the given \*(T<\-\-src\*(T> directories. For example:

.nf
\*(T<ceylon version \-\-set 1.1 ceylon.collection
\*(T>.fi

would update the version of ceylon.collection to 1.1 and update the module import version of all dependent modules in the given \*(T<\-\-src\*(T> directories which depended on \*(T<ceylon.collection\*(T> __even if those modules are not listed as \*(T<<modules>\*(T>__.

Whereas:

.nf
\*(T<ceylon version \-\-set 1.1 \-\-no\-update\-dependencies ceylon.collection
\*(T>.fi

would just update the version of \*(T<ceylon.collection\*(T> to 1.1, leaving dependent modules depending on the old version.
.TP 
--set=\fIvalue\fR
The new version number to set.If unspecified then module versions are shown and not updated.
.TP 
--source=\fIdirs\fR
An alias for \*(T<\-\-src\*(T> (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--src=\fIdir\fR
A directory containing Ceylon and/or Java source code (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SH EXAMPLES
Listing the versions of all the modules in the ceylon SDK:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon version
\*(T>.fi
.PP
Listing the version of ceylon.collection, and modules that depend on it
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon version \-\-dependencies ceylon.collection
\*(T>.fi
.PP
Updating the version of ceylon.collection, and the modules that depend on it
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon version \-\-set 1.0.1 ceylon.collection\*(T>
.fi
