'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon compile-js" 1 "15 September 2016" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon compile-js \- Compiles Ceylon source code to JavaScript and directly produces module and source archives in a module repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon compile-js\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--compact] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--encoding=\fIencoding\fR] [--lexical-scope-style] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-comments] [--no-default-repositories] [--no-indent] [--no-module] [--offline] [--out=\fIurl\fR] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--pass=\fIsecret\fR] [--profile] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--resource=\fIdirs\fR...] [--resource-root=\fIfolder-name\fR] [--skip-src-archive] [--source=\fIdirs\fR...] [--src=\fIdirs\fR...] [--suppress-warning[=\fIwarnings\fR...]] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--user=\fIname\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] [moduleOrFile]\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--compact
Equivalent to \*(T<\-\-no\-indent\*(T> \*(T<\-\-no\-comments\*(T>
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--encoding=\fIencoding\fR, -E \fIencoding\fR
Sets the encoding used for reading source files (default: platform-specific)
.TP 
--lexical-scope-style
Create lexical scope-style JS code
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-comments
Do \fBnot\fR generate any comments
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--no-indent
Do \fBnot\fR indent code (deprecated)
.TP 
--no-module
Do \fBnot\fR wrap generated code as CommonJS module
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--out=\fIurl\fR, -o \fIurl\fR
Specifies the output module repository (which must be publishable). (default: \*(T<./modules\*(T>)
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--pass=\fIsecret\fR
Sets the password for use with an authenticated output repository (no default).
.TP 
--profile
Time the compilation phases (results are printed to standard error)
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--resource=\fIdirs\fR, -r \fIdirs\fR
Path to directory containing resource files. Can be specified multiple times; you can also specify several paths separated by your operating system's \*(T<PATH\*(T> separator. (default: \*(T<./resource\*(T>)
.TP 
--resource-root=\fIfolder-name\fR, -R \fIfolder-name\fR
Sets the special resource folder name whose files will end up in the root of the resulting module CAR file (default: ROOT).
.TP 
--skip-src-archive
Do \fBnot\fR generate .src archive - useful when doing joint compilation
.TP 
--source=\fIdirs\fR
An alias for \*(T<\-\-src\*(T> (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--src=\fIdirs\fR, -s \fIdirs\fR
Path to source files. Can be specified multiple times; you can also specify several paths separated by your operating system's \*(T<PATH\*(T> separator. (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--suppress-warning[=\fIwarnings\fR], -W
Suppress the reporting of the given warnings. If no \*(T<warnings\*(T> are given then suppresss the reporting of all warnings, otherwise just suppresss those which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<filenameNonAscii\*(T>, \*(T<filenameClaselessCollision\*(T>, \*(T<deprecation\*(T>, \*(T<compilerAnnotation\*(T>, \*(T<doclink\*(T>, \*(T<expressionTypeNothing\*(T>, \*(T<unusedDeclaration\*(T>, \*(T<unusedImport\*(T>, \*(T<ceylonNamespace\*(T>, \*(T<javaNamespace\*(T>, \*(T<suppressedAlready\*(T>, \*(T<suppressesNothing\*(T>.
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--user=\fIname\fR
Sets the user name for use with an authenticated output repository (no default).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>, \*(T<ast\*(T>, \*(T<code\*(T>, \*(T<stitcher\*(T>.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
The compile tool accepts the following options from the Ceylon configuration file: \*(T<defaults.offline\*(T>, \*(T<defaults.encoding\*(T>, \*(T<compiler.source\*(T>, \*(T<compiler.resource\*(T> and \*(T<repositories\*(T> (the equivalent options on the command line always have precedence).
.SH REPOSITORIES
Repositories like those specified with the \*(T<\-\-rep\*(T> or \*(T<\-\-out\*(T> options can be file paths, HTTP urls to remote servers or can be names of repositories when prepended with a \*(T<+\*(T> symbol. These names refer to repositories defined in the configuration file or can be any of the following predefined names \*(T<+SYSTEM\*(T>, \*(T<+CACHE\*(T>, \*(T<+LOCAL\*(T>, \*(T<+USER\*(T>, \*(T<+REMOTE\*(T> or \*(T<+MAVEN\*(T>. For more information see http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/1.2/reference/repository/tools
