'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon maven-export" 1 "18 August 2017" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon maven-export \- Generate a Maven repository for a given module
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon maven-export\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--exclude-module=\fImoduleOrFile\fR...] [--for-import] [--for-sdk-import] [--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR] [--link-with-current-distribution] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--out=\fIfile\fR] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Generate Maven repository which contains the given module and all its run-time dependencies, including the Ceylon runtime, which makes that repository usable by Maven as a regular Maven repository.
.PP
Alternatively, running with \*(T<\-\-for\-import\*(T> creates a special repository set up suitable for importing the Ceylon distribution into Maven Central. This is mostly useful for the Ceylon team.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--exclude-module=\fImoduleOrFile\fR, -x \fImoduleOrFile\fR
Excludes modules from the resulting Maven repository. Can be a module name or a file containing module names. Can be specified multiple times.
.TP 
--for-import
Special set up to create a set of folders to import the distrib.
.TP 
--for-sdk-import
Special set up to create a set of folders to import the Ceylon SDK.
.TP 
--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR
Alternate JDK provider module (defaults to the current running JDK).
.TP 
--link-with-current-distribution
Downgrade which were compiled with a more recent version of the distribution to the version of that module present in this distribution (1.3.3). This might fail with a linker error at runtime. For example if the module depended on an API present in the more recent version, but absent from 1.3.3. Allowed arguments are upgrade, downgrade or abort. Default: upgrade
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--out=\fIfile\fR, -o \fIfile\fR
Target Maven repository folder (defaults to \*(T<maven\-repository\*(T>).
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR, -O \fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fInull\fR.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
