'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon p2" 1 "18 August 2017" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon p2 \- Generates p2 repository metadata suitable for Eclipse
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon p2\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--categories=\fIcategories\fR] [--category-prefix=\fIcategory-prefix\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--out=\fIurl\fR] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--pass=\fIsecret\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--repository-name=\fIrepository-name\fR] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--user=\fIname\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is EXPERIMENTAL
.PP
Given a list of modules, and optionally a category file and prefix, this tool generates \*(T<content.xml\*(T> and \*(T<artifacts.xml\*(T> files in the output directory, and packs the folders in \*(T<${output}/features/*\*(T> into jars.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--categories=\fIcategories\fR
Specify a \*(T<categories.xml\*(T> file to be used for the list of categories
.TP 
--category-prefix=\fIcategory-prefix\fR
Specify the prefix for categories, for example if you have a category named 'x' and a prefix of 'com.foo.bar' we will generate a unit named 'com.foo.bar.x' for your category
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--out=\fIurl\fR, -o \fIurl\fR
Specifies the output module repository (which must be publishable). (default: \*(T<./modules\*(T>)
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR, -O \fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fInull\fR.
.TP 
--pass=\fIsecret\fR
Sets the password for use with an authenticated output repository (no default).
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--repository-name=\fIrepository-name\fR
Specify an output repository name
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--user=\fIname\fR
Sets the user name for use with an authenticated output repository (no default).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
