'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon test" 1 "11 November 2013" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon test \- Executes tests
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon test\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--compile[=\fIflags\fR]] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR...] [--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--test=\fItest\fR...] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {modules}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Executes tests in specified \*(T<<modules>\*(T>. The \*(T<<modules>\*(T> arguments are the names of the modules to test with an optional version.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--compile[=\fIflags\fR]
Determines if and how compilation should be handled.Allowed flags include: \*(T<never\*(T>, \*(T<once\*(T>, \*(T<force\*(T>, \*(T<check\*(T>.
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR, -D \fIkey>=<value\fR
Set a system property
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the xml file to use to load Maven artifact overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, http://modules.ceylon-lang.org/repo/1)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--test=\fItest\fR
Specifies which tests will be run.
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
The test tool accepts the following option from the Ceylon configuration file: \*(T<testtool.compile\*(T> (the equivalent option on the command line always has precedence).## EXAMPLE
.PP
The following would execute tests in the \*(T<com.example.foobar\*(T> module:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon test com.example.foobar/1.0.0\*(T>
.fi
