'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon import-jar" 1 "11 November 2013" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon import-jar \- Imports a jar file into a Ceylon module repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon import-jar\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR...] [--descriptor=\fIfile\fR] [--out=\fIdir-or-url\fR] [--pass=\fIsecret\fR] [--user=\fIname\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module} {jar-file}
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Imports the given \*(T<<jar\-file>\*(T> using the module name and version given by \*(T<<module>\*(T> into the repository named by the \*(T<\-\-out\*(T> option.
.PP
\*(T<<module>\*(T> is a module name and version separated with a slash, for example \*(T<com.example.foobar/1.2.0\*(T>.
.PP
\*(T<<jar\-file>\*(T> is the name of the Jar file to import.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR, -D \fIkey>=<value\fR
Set a system property
.TP 
--descriptor=\fIfile\fR
Specify a module.xml or module.properties file to be used as the module descriptor
.TP 
--out=\fIdir-or-url\fR
Specifies the module repository (which must be publishable) into which the jar file should be imported. (default: \*(T<./modules\*(T>)
.TP 
--pass=\fIsecret\fR
Sets the password for use with an authenticated output repository.
.TP 
--user=\fIname\fR
Sets the user name for use with an authenticated output repository.
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
