'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon new" 1 "11 November 2013" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon new \- Generates a new Ceylon project
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon new\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR...] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] hello-world [--ant=\fIvalue\fR] [--eclipse=\fIvalue\fR] [--eclipse-project-name=\fIvalue\fR] [--module-name=\fIvalue\fR] [--module-version=\fIvalue\fR] [--] {dir}
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Generates a new project, prompting for information as necessary
.SS "THE hello-world SUBCOMMAND"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR, -D \fIkey>=<value\fR
Set a system property
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SS "OPTIONS FOR hello-world SUBCOMMAND"
.TP 
--ant=\fIvalue\fR
This option is not documented.
.TP 
--eclipse=\fIvalue\fR
This option is not documented.
.TP 
--eclipse-project-name=\fIvalue\fR
This option is not documented.
.TP 
--module-name=\fIvalue\fR
This option is not documented.
.TP 
--module-version=\fIvalue\fR
This option is not documented.
