'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon src" 1 "11 November 2013" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon src \- Fetches source archives from a repository and extracts their contents into a source directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon src\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR...] [--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--source=\fIdirs\fR] [--src=\fIdir\fR] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Fetches the source archive of the given \*(T<module\*(T> from the first configured repository to contain the module and extracts the source code into the output source directory. Multiple modules can be given.
.PP
This tool is especially useful for working with example projects.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR, -D \fIkey>=<value\fR
Set a system property
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the xml file to use to load Maven artifact overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, http://modules.ceylon-lang.org/repo/1)
.TP 
--source=\fIdirs\fR
An alias for \*(T<\-\-src\*(T> (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--src=\fIdir\fR
The output source directory (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SH EXAMPLES
A typical workflow might be:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<mkdir my\-project
cd my\-project
ceylon src org.example.foo
ceylon compile org.example.foo
ceylon run org.example.foo\*(T>
.fi
