'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon info" 1 "11 November 2013" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon info \- Prints information about modules in repositories
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon info\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR...] [--dependency-depth=\fIdepth\fR] [--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--show-dependencies] [--show-incompatible] [--show-type=\fItype\fR] [--show-versions] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
When passed a search query like \*(T<*foo*\*(T> it will look at all the modules in all repositories and see if the word \*(T<foo\*(T> appears anywhere in the name, description, version, license or any other field in the module's desciptor and print their names. 
.PP
When passed a partial module name like \*(T<com.acme.foo*\*(T> it will look at all the modules in all the repositoriues and see if their names start with \*(T<com.acme.foo\*(T> and print their names.
.PP
When passed a complete module name like \*(T<com.acme.foobar\*(T> it will print the list of available versions for that module. Versions marked with \*(T<*\*(T> are not currently available on the local system but can be downloaded on-demand from remote servers.
.PP
When passed a complete module name and version like \*(T<com.acme.foobar/1.0\*(T> it will print information about the contents of a module archive, its description, its licence and its dependencies
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--define=\fIkey>=<value\fR, -D \fIkey>=<value\fR
Set a system property
.TP 
--dependency-depth=\fIdepth\fR
The depth of the dependency tree to show, or \*(T<all\*(T> for the full tree. (Allowed values: any positive integer or \*(T<all\*(T>, default: \*(T<1\*(T>)
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the xml file to use to load Maven artifact overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, http://modules.ceylon-lang.org/repo/1)
.TP 
--show-dependencies
Show the dependencies whenever versions are shown
.TP 
--show-incompatible
Also show versions incompatible with the current Ceylon installation
.TP 
--show-type=\fItype\fR
The artifact ypes to show information for. Allowed values include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<jvm\*(T>, \*(T<js\*(T>, \*(T<src\*(T> (default is \*(T<all\*(T>).
.TP 
--show-versions
Show the versions when searching for modules
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
