'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon test" 1 "10 February 2016" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon test \- Executes tests
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon test\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--auto-export-maven-dependencies] [--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--compile[=\fIflags\fR]] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--flat-classpath] [--link-with-current-distribution] [--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--overrides=\fIurl\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--report] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--tag=\fItag\fR...] [--tap] [--test=\fItest\fR...] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--version=\fIversion\fR] [--] {modules}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Executes tests in specified \*(T<<modules>\*(T>. The \*(T<<modules>\*(T> arguments are the names of the modules to test with an optional version.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--auto-export-maven-dependencies
When using JBoss Modules (the default), treats all module dependencies between Maven modules as shared.
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--compile[=\fIflags\fR]
Determines if and how compilation should be handled. Allowed flags include: \*(T<never\*(T>, \*(T<once\*(T>, \*(T<force\*(T>, \*(T<check\*(T>.
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--flat-classpath
Launches the Ceylon module using a flat classpath.
.TP 
--link-with-current-distribution
Link modules which were compiled with a more recent version of the distribution to the version of that module present in this distribution (1.2.1). This might fail with a linker error at runtime. For example if the module depended on an API present in the more recent version, but absent from 1.2.1. Allowed arguments are upgrade, downgrade or abort. Default: upgrade
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--overrides=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--report
Generates the test results report into HTML format, output directory is \*(T<reports/test\*(T> (experimental).
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--tag=\fItag\fR
Specifies which tests will be run according to their tags. It can be used as include filter, so only tests with specified tag will be executed. But it can be used also as exclude filter, if tag name is prefixed with !, so only tests without specified tag will be executed..
.TP 
--tap
Enables the Test Anything Protocol v13.
.TP 
--test=\fItest\fR
Specifies which tests will be run.
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.TP 
--version=\fIversion\fR
Specifies which version of the test module to use.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
The test tool accepts the following option from the Ceylon configuration file: \*(T<testtool.compile\*(T> (the equivalent option on the command line always has precedence).
.SH EXAMPLE
The following would execute tests in the \*(T<com.example.foobar\*(T> module:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon test com.example.foobar/1.0.0\*(T>
.fi
