'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon info" 1 "21 November 2016" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon info \- Prints information about modules in repositories
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon info\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--dependency-depth=\fIdepth\fR] [--exact-match] [--find-member=\fImember-name\fR] [--find-package=\fIpackage-name\fR] [--formatting=\fIformatting\fR] [--include-optional] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--print-overrides] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--require-all] [--show-dependencies] [--show-full-description] [--show-incompatible=\fImode\fR] [--show-names] [--show-type=\fItype\fR] [--show-versions] [--src=\fIdir\fR...] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
When passed a search query like \*(T<*foo*\*(T> it will look at all the modules in all repositories and see if the word \*(T<foo\*(T> appears anywhere in the name, description, version, license or any other field in the module's descriptor and print their names. 
.PP
When passed a partial module name like \*(T<com.acme.foo*\*(T> it will look at all the modules in all the repositories and see if their names start with \*(T<com.acme.foo\*(T> and print their names.
.PP
When passed a complete module name like \*(T<com.acme.foobar\*(T> it will print the list of available versions for that module, with the module repository in which each version was found. Versions marked with \*(T<*\*(T> are not currently available on the local file system but will be downloaded on-demand from remote servers.
.PP
When passed a complete module name and version like \*(T<com.acme.foobar/1.0\*(T> it will print information about the contents of a module archive, its description, its licence and its dependencies
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--dependency-depth=\fIdepth\fR
The depth of the dependency tree to show, or \*(T<all\*(T> for the full tree. (Allowed values: any positive integer or \*(T<all\*(T>, default: \*(T<1\*(T>)
.TP 
--exact-match
Only returns exact matches when using the \*(T<find\-member\*(T> or \*(T<find\-package\*(T> option
.TP 
--find-member=\fImember-name\fR
Shows only those modules that contain members whose name match the given argument.
.TP 
--find-package=\fIpackage-name\fR
Shows only those modules that contain packages whose name match the given argument.
.TP 
--formatting=\fIformatting\fR
Set the output formatting to use, can be \*(T<simple\*(T> or \*(T<fancy\*(T>
.TP 
--include-optional
Include optional modules when traversing dependencies
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--print-overrides
Print a usable module overrides file when there are duplicate versions, selecting the latest versions
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--require-all
Only show those results that have all the requested artifact types
.TP 
--show-dependencies
Show the dependencies whenever versions are shown
.TP 
--show-full-description
Shows the full description for module details
.TP 
--show-incompatible=\fImode\fR
Also show versions incompatible with the current Ceylon installation. allowed values are: 'yes', 'no' and 'auto'
.TP 
--show-names
Show the matching items when using the \*(T<find\-member\*(T> or \*(T<find\-package\*(T> option
.TP 
--show-type=\fItype\fR
The artifact types to show information for. Allowed values include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<jvm\*(T>, \*(T<car\*(T>, \*(T<jar\*(T>, \*(T<js\*(T>, \*(T<src\*(T>, \*(T<code\*(T>, \*(T<ceylon\*(T> (default is \*(T<all\*(T>).
.TP 
--show-versions
Show the versions when searching for modules
.TP 
--src=\fIdir\fR
A directory containing Ceylon and/or Java source code (default: \*(T<./source\*(T>)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SH EXAMPLE
First list the available modules in the 'ceylon' namespace:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon info 'ceylon.*'
\*(T>.fi
.PP
Next list the versions of a module:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon info ceylon.collection
\*(T>.fi
.PP
Then view information for a particular version:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon info ceylon.collection/1.2.0\*(T>
.fi
