'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon run-js" 1 "21 November 2016" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon run-js \- Executes a Ceylon program on Node.js
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon run-js\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--compile[=\fIflags\fR]] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--debug=\fIdebug\fR] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--node-exe=\fInode-exe\fR] [--offline] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--run=\fItoplevel\fR] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] [module]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Executes the ceylon program specified as the \*(T<module\*(T> argument. The \*(T<module\*(T> may optionally include a version.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--compile[=\fIflags\fR]
Determines if and how compilation should be handled. Allowed flags include: \*(T<never\*(T>, \*(T<once\*(T>, \*(T<force\*(T>, \*(T<check\*(T>.
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--debug=\fIdebug\fR
Shows more detailed output in case of errors.
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--node-exe=\fInode-exe\fR
The path to the Node.js executable. Will be searched in standard locations if not specified.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--run=\fItoplevel\fR
Specifies the fully qualified name of a toplevel method or class to run. The indicated declaration must be shared by the \*(T<module\*(T> and have no parameters. The format is: \*(T<qualified.package.name::classOrMethodName\*(T> with \*(T<::\*(T> acting as separator between the package name and the toplevel class or method name. (default: \*(T<module.name::run\*(T>)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
.SH "COMPILE FLAGS"
The \*(T<\-\-compile\*(T> option can take the following flags: 
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\fBnever\fR - Never perform any compilation
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\fBonce\fR - Only compile when the compiled module is not available
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\fBcheck\fR - Compile when the sources are newer than the compiled module
.TP 0.2i
\(bu
\fBforce\fR - Always compile
.PP
If the flag is given without an argument it's the same as specifying \*(T<check\*(T>. If no flag is given at all it's the same as specifying \*(T<never\*(T>.
.SH "CONFIGURATION FILE"
The run-js tool accepts the following option from the Ceylon configuration file: \*(T<runtool.compile\*(T> (the equivalent option on the command line always has precedence).
.SH EXAMPLE
The following would execute the \*(T<com.example.foobar\*(T> module:
.PP
.nf
\*(T<ceylon run\-js com.example.foobar/1.0.0\*(T>
.fi
