'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon classpath" 1 "1 March 2017" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon classpath \- Prints a classpath suitable for passing to Java tools to run a given Ceylon module
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon classpath\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--force] [--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR] [--link-with-current-distribution] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Will print a classpath for a given set of Ceylon modules, suitable for use with Java tools to run a given Ceylon module outside of the regular JBoss Modules container used in \*(T<ceylon run\*(T>. If you need to force inclusion of optional modules, you can specify them as additional modules after your main module.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--force
Force generation of classpath with multiple versions of the same module.
.TP 
--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR
Alternate JDK provider module (defaults to the current running JDK).
.TP 
--link-with-current-distribution
Downgrade which were compiled with a more recent version of the distribution to the version of that module present in this distribution (1.3.2). This might fail with a linker error at runtime. For example if the module depended on an API present in the more recent version, but absent from 1.3.2. Allowed arguments are upgrade, downgrade or abort. Default: upgrade
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
