'\" -*- coding: us-ascii -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH "ceylon fat-jar" 1 "1 March 2017" "" ""
.SH NAME
ceylon fat-jar \- Generate a Ceylon executable jar for a given module
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBceylon fat-jar\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--cacherep=\fIurl\fR] [--cwd=\fIdir\fR] [--exclude-module=\fImoduleOrFile\fR...] [--force] [--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR] [--link-with-current-distribution] [--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--no-default-repositories] [--offline] [--out=\fIfile\fR] [--overrides=\fIfile\fR] [--rep=\fIurl\fR...] [--run=\fItoplevel\fR] [--sysrep=\fIurl\fR] [--timeout=\fIseconds\fR] [--verbose[=\fIflags\fR]] [--] {module}\&...
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
Gerate an executable \fIfat jar\fR which contains the given module and all its run-time dependencies, including the Ceylon run-time, which makes that jar self-sufficient and executable by \*(T<java\*(T> as if the Ceylon module was run by \*(T<ceylon run\*(T>.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
--cacherep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the folder to use for caching downloaded modules. (default: \*(T<~/.ceylon/cache\*(T>)
.TP 
--cwd=\fIdir\fR
Specifies the current working directory for this tool. (default: the directory where the tool is run from)
.TP 
--exclude-module=\fImoduleOrFile\fR, -x \fImoduleOrFile\fR
Excludes modules from the resulting far jat. Can be a module name or a file containing module names. Can be specified multiple times. Note that this excludes the module from the resulting fat jar, but if your modules require that module to be present at runtime it will still be required and may cause your application to fail to start if it is not provided at runtime.
.TP 
--force
Force generation of mlib folder with multiple versions of the same module.
.TP 
--jdk-provider=\fImodule\fR
Alternate JDK provider module (defaults to the current running JDK).
.TP 
--link-with-current-distribution
Downgrade which were compiled with a more recent version of the distribution to the version of that module present in this distribution (1.3.2). This might fail with a linker error at runtime. For example if the module depended on an API present in the more recent version, but absent from 1.3.2. Allowed arguments are upgrade, downgrade or abort. Default: upgrade
.TP 
--maven-overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load Maven artifact overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. Deprecated: use --overrides.
.TP 
--no-default-repositories
Indicates that the default repositories should not be used.
.TP 
--offline, -L
Enables offline mode that will prevent connections to remote repositories.
.TP 
--out=\fIfile\fR, -o \fIfile\fR
Target fat-jar file (defaults to \*(T<{name}\-{version}.jar\*(T>).
.TP 
--overrides=\fIfile\fR
Specifies the XML file to use to load module overrides. See http://ceylon-lang.org/documentation/current/reference/repository/maven/ for information. \fIExperimental\fR.
.TP 
--rep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies a module repository containing dependencies. Can be specified multiple times. (default: \*(T<modules\*(T>, \*(T<~/.ceylon/repo\*(T>, \*(T<https://modules.ceylon\-lang.org/repo/1\*(T>)
.TP 
--run=\fItoplevel\fR
Specifies the fully qualified name of a toplevel method or class with no parameters. The format is: \*(T<qualified.package.name::classOrMethodName\*(T> with \*(T<::\*(T> acting as separator between the package name and the toplevel class or method name (defaults to \*(T<{module}::run\*(T>).
.TP 
--sysrep=\fIurl\fR
Specifies the system repository containing essential modules. (default: \*(T<$CEYLON_HOME/repo\*(T>)
.TP 
--timeout=\fIseconds\fR, -T \fIseconds\fR
Sets the timeout for connections to remote repositories, use 0 for no timeout (default: 20).
.TP 
--verbose[=\fIflags\fR], -d
Produce verbose output. If no \*(T<flags\*(T> are given then be verbose about everything, otherwise just be verbose about the flags which are present. Allowed flags include: \*(T<all\*(T>, \*(T<loader\*(T>.
